[ENH] Add part entity for complex-valued data (#424)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.md

contrast agent. The key `ContrastBolusIngredient` MAY be also be added in the
JSON file, with the same label.

This entity is used to indicate which component of the complex representation of the MRI signal is represented in voxel data.
The [`part-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#part) key/value pair is associated with the DICOM tag `0008,9208`.
Allowed label values for this entity are `phase`, `mag`, `real` and `imag`, which are typically used in `mag/phase` or `real/imag` pairs.
For example:

```Text
sub-01_part-mag_T1w.nii.gz
sub-01_part-mag_T1w.json
sub-01_part-phase_T1w.nii.gz
sub-01_part-phase_T1w.json
```

Phase images MAY be in radians or in arbitrary units.
The sidecar JSON file MUST include the units of the `phase` image.
The possible options are `rad` or `a.u.`.
For example:

sub-01_part-phase_T1w.json

```Text
{
   "Units": "rad"
}
```

When there is only a magnitude image of a given type, the `part` key MAY be omitted.

> 

Reviewer: Having removed section headers, the flow of this is now strange. We start with "This entity" and don't reference `part` until the next sentence. The `ContrastBolusIngredient` seems like it should be associated with `ce-`, which is defined above `part-`.

I've proposed #615 for promoting `Units` beyond this one context, which I think would also have the side effect of allowing this section to be a bit more compact and improve the flow.

Author: I think the text around `ContrastBolusIngredient` should be changed so it doesn't sound like it's talking about anatomical MRI-specific metadata in general, but for this PR I've just moved that paragraph up to be back with the `ce` entity definition.

contrast agent. The key `ContrastBolusIngredient` MAY be also be added in the
JSON file, with the same label.

#### The `part` entity

This entity is used to indicate which component of the complex representation of the MRI signal is represented in voxel data.
The `part-<label>` key/value pair is associated with the DICOM tag `0008,9208`.
Allowed label values for this entity are `phase`, `mag`, `real` and `imag`, which are typically used in `mag/phase` or `real/imag` pairs.
For example:

```Text
sub-01_part-mag_T1w.nii.gz
sub-01_part-mag_T1w.json
sub-01_part-phase_T1w.nii.gz
sub-01_part-phase_T1w.json
```

Phase images MAY be in radians or in arbitrary units.
The sidecar JSON file MUST include the units of the `phase` image.

> The possible options are: `radians` or `a.u.` for grayscale images.

Author: Related to #580, do we want "a.u." or "arbU"?

Author: Agreed. I'd prefer to remove "grayscale", although I believe it's used fairly frequently in #508.

For example:

sub-01_part-phase.json

```Text
{
   "Units": "radians"
}
```

> If the `part` key/value pair is absent from a filename, the image SHOULD be a magnitude image.

Reviewer: This feels like a strange directive. Does it permit me to have:

```
sub-01_T1w.nii.gz
sub-01_part-phase_T1w.nii.gz
```

I might instead treat this as `run-`, which we say may be omitted if only one run is provided.

```suggestion
When there is only a magnitude image of a given type, the `part` key MAY be omitted.
```

| ----------------------- | --------------------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ContrastBolusIngredient | OPTIONAL              | [string][]    | Active ingredient of agent. Values MUST be one of: IODINE, GADOLINIUM, CARBON DIOXIDE, BARIUM, XENON Corresponds to DICOM Tag 0018,1048. |

The [`part-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#part) key/value pair is
used to indicate which component of the complex representation of the MRI
signal is represented in voxel data.
This entity is associated with the DICOM tag `0008,9208`.
Allowed label values for this entity are `phase`, `mag`, `real` and `imag`,
which are typically used in `mag/phase` or `real/imag` pairs.
For example:

```Text
sub-01_part-mag_T1w.nii.gz
sub-01_part-mag_T1w.json
sub-01_part-phase_T1w.nii.gz
sub-01_part-phase_T1w.json
```

Phase images MAY be in radians or in arbitrary units.
The sidecar JSON file MUST include the units of the `phase` image.

> The possible options are `rad` or `a.u.`.

Author: ```suggestion
The possible options are `rad` or `arbitrary`.
```

| ----------------------- | --------------------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ContrastBolusIngredient | OPTIONAL              | [string][]    | Active ingredient of agent. Values MUST be one of: IODINE, GADOLINIUM, CARBON DIOXIDE, BARIUM, XENON Corresponds to DICOM Tag 0018,1048. |

The [`part-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#part) key/value pair is
used to indicate which component of the complex representation of the MRI
signal is represented in voxel data.
This entity is associated with the DICOM tag `0008,9208`.
Allowed label values for this entity are `phase`, `mag`, `real` and `imag`,

> which are typically used in `mag/phase` or `real/imag` pairs.

Reviewer 2: >  which are typically used in `mag/phase` or `real/imag` pairs.

this may make some people believe they have to specify `*_part-mag/phase*`, whereas the example shows that it should be rather a pair of files - one for mag, one for phase (vice versa for real, imag).

Author: What about the following?

> which are typically used in `part-mag`/`part-phase` or `part-real`/`part-imag` pairs of files.

Reviewer 2: Much better, thanks!

```Text
sub-<label>/[ses-<label>/]
    func/
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_dir-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_echo-<index>]_bold.nii[.gz]
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_dir-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_echo-<index>]_phase.nii[.gz]
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_dir-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_echo-<index>][_part-<mag|phase>]_cbv.nii[.gz]

>         sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_dir-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_echo-<index>][_part-<mag|phase>]_sbref.nii[.gz]

Reviewer 3: I am not sure if such detailed specification and expansion of different `contrast_label`s is needed here. 
`_bold` is indeed a special case though since now it has a dedicated `_phase`.  So now there cannot be another `func` contrast than `_bold` which would have its `_phase`. 
NB ASL BEP005 seems decided to avoid `func/` and went for a dedicted `perf/` (perfusion) although its purpose AFAIK would be `func/`.
Unfortunately I did not follow the discussion in #128.  I would have voted for any `contrast_label` to "assume" its default "composition" - either it is a mag or phase or combined if no `_part` is provided.  Then #128 could have resulted in adding `_part-phase` and having explicit `_part-phase_bold`, opening possibilities for any other `_part-phase_<contrast>`.

Sure thing `_part-` makes no sense with `_phase`, but I think that is just a corner case which might be gone in 2.0.
So why not just to keep `[_part-<mag|phase>]_<contrast_label>` and just add a note to `_phase` in the table that `_part` then should not be specified. Also it might be worth starting adding "deprecation" statements on elements which will be removed in 2.0, but that would be a separate issue I guess ;)

Currently supported image contrasts include:

> | **Name**  | `contrast_label` | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer: Should we go ahead with #571 or leave it to another PR?

```suggestion
| **Name**  | `suffix` | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
```

Author: This will be handled automatically in #610, but I don't see any harm in doing it now as well.

|---------- | ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| BOLD      | bold             | Blood-Oxygen-Level Dependent contrast (specialized T2\* weighting)                                                                                                                                                  |
| CBV       | cbv              | Cerebral Blood Volume contrast (specialized T2\* weighting or difference between T1 weighted images)                                                                                                                |

> | Phase     | phase            | Phase information associated with magnitude information stored in BOLD contrast. [Deprecated](../02-common-principles.md#definitions). [`part-phase`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#part) should be used instead. |

Reviewer: I think we can be a little BOLDER about this, and more explicit about using the `bold` suffix.

```suggestion
| Phase     | phase            | [DEPRECATED](../02-common-principles.md#definitions). Phase information associated with magnitude information stored in BOLD contrast. This suffix should be replaced by the [`part-phase`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#part) in conjunction with the `bold` suffix. |
```

Template:

```Text
sub-<label>/[ses-<label>/]
    func/
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_dir-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_echo-<index>][_part-<label>]_bold.nii[.gz]

>         sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_dir-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_echo-<index>]_phase.nii[.gz]

Reviewer: Since it's deprecated, I would suggest dropping this.

```suggestion
```

Author: Hm... I think #610 will revert this, since the schema doesn't have any concept of "deprecated" just yet. Still, I think it's a reasonable practice to adopt.

Currently supported image contrasts include:

> | **Name**  | `suffix`         | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
> |---------- | ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
> | BOLD      | bold             | Blood-Oxygen-Level Dependent contrast (specialized T2\* weighting)                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
> | CBV       | cbv              | Cerebral Blood Volume contrast (specialized T2\* weighting or difference between T1 weighted images)                                                                                                                                                                     |
> | Phase     | phase            | [DEPRECATED](../02-common-principles.md#definitions). Phase information associated with magnitude information stored in BOLD contrast. This suffix should be replaced by the [`part-phase`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#part) in conjunction with the `bold` suffix. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Name**  | `suffix` | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|---------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| BOLD      | bold     | Blood-Oxygen-Level Dependent contrast (specialized T2\* weighting)                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| CBV       | cbv      | Cerebral Blood Volume contrast (specialized T2\* weighting or difference between T1 weighted images)                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Phase     | phase    | [DEPRECATED](../02-common-principles.md#definitions). Phase information associated with magnitude information stored in BOLD contrast. This suffix should be replaced by the [`part-phase`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#part) in conjunction with the `bold` suffix. |
```

|---------- | ---------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| BOLD      | bold             | Blood-Oxygen-Level Dependent contrast (specialized T2\* weighting)                                   |
| CBV       | cbv              | Cerebral Blood Volume contrast (specialized T2\* weighting or difference between T1 weighted images) |

> | Phase     | phase            | Phase information associated with magnitude information stored in BOLD contrast. [Deprecated](../02-common-principles.md#definitions).         |

Reviewer: Let's specify what it should be replaced with, as well.

Author: I'm really looking forward to a later version of the work in #610 so I won't have to edit Markdown tables directly ever again.. But yes, will do.

integer) of the echo not the echo time value which needs to be stored in the
field EchoTime of the separate JSON file.

Complex-valued data MUST be split into one file for each data type.
For BOLD data, there are separate suffices for magnitude (`_bold`) and phase

> (`_phase`) data.

Reviewer 3: echoing on above I would have preferred `1.x` was "forward looking" and allowed `_part-<mag|phase>` for `_bold` while announcing `_phase` deprecated.  Similar to how such deprecations are done in software.  That would ease later migration to BIDS 2.0.  It would be only a slight burden for bids-apps to support both layouts IMHO, but would also simplify their support for BIDS 2.0.

Reviewer: I agree with @yarikoptic. I would suggest that we say `_part-<mag|phase>`, and then say "For backwards compatibility, `_phase.nii.gz` is considered equivalent to `_part-phase_bold.nii.gz`."

Author: I didn't realize that was possible, but I certainly love the idea. By the way, for posterity's sake, I have an open issue in `bids-2-devel` about eliminating `_phase` (and other suffixes that could be better handled with this entity): https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-2-devel/issues/3.

Author: Should be good now (although the wording could use a review).

nonnegative integer) of the echo not the echo time value which needs to be stored in the
field EchoTime of the separate JSON file.

Complex-valued data MUST be split into one file for each data type.
For BOLD data, there are separate suffixes for magnitude (`_bold`) and phase
(`_phase`) data, but the `_phase` suffix is considered a legacy suffix
(i.e., still supported in the specification, but to be deprecated later).
For backwards compatibility, `_phase` is considered equivalent to `_part-phase_bold`.
When the `_phase` suffix is not used, each file shares the same
name with the exception of the `part-<mag|phase>` or `part-<real|imag>` key/value.
For example:

```Text
sub-01/
   func/
      sub-01_task-cuedSGT_part-mag_bold.nii.gz
      sub-01_task-cuedSGT_part-mag_bold.json
      sub-01_task-cuedSGT_part-phase_bold.nii.gz
      sub-01_task-cuedSGT_part-phase_bold.json
      sub-01_task-cuedSGT_part-mag_sbref.nii.gz

>       sub-01_task-cuedSGT_part-mag_sbref.nii.gz
>       sub-01_task-cuedSGT_part-phase_sbref.nii.gz
>       sub-01_task-cuedSGT_part-phase_sbref.nii.gz

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      sub-01_task-cuedSGT_part-mag_sbref.json
      sub-01_task-cuedSGT_part-phase_sbref.nii.gz
      sub-01_task-cuedSGT_part-phase_sbref.json
```

nonnegative integer) of the echo not the echo time value which needs to be stored in the
field EchoTime of the separate JSON file.

Complex-valued data MUST be split into one file for each data type.
For BOLD data, there are separate suffixes for magnitude (`_bold`) and phase
(`_phase`) data, but the `_phase` suffix is considered a legacy suffix

> (i.e., still supported in the specification, but to be deprecated later).

Reviewer 2: good place to insert a link about our definition of deprecation here, see https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/611

Author: Agreed, although I was planning to wait until a corresponding PR was merged.

Reviewer: @tsalo #634 is merged. Want to update this? This PR overall LGTM, and this is the only thing left to change.

Author: Good catch. I've updated the text. It would be nice to link directly to the deprecation definition, but I did the next best thing and links to the Definitions section.
